Backdrop CMS User Guide
An introductory guide for site editors
1 Outline of what Backdrop CMS does
Congratulations on becoming a Site Editor for a website that is created and managed using a 
powerful open-source Content Management System called Backdrop CMS.
This guide is intended to help you get started with managing your website content, for 
example editing existing pages and adding new content. System administration tasks such as 
adding new features to Backdrop or updating with new releases are covered in separate 
technical guide.
Backdrop is a powerful system, developed by a voluntary community of experts, building on 
the years of experience and software developed for the well-established Drupal system, but 
focussing in particular on the needs of Small and Medium businesses and organizations. You 
can read more about it on their website at www.backdropcms.org
One of the main aims of Backdrop is to provide a system that is easy to use, whilst retaining 
the power and flexibility of a fully comprehensive Content Management System (CMS). 
Backdrop is software that runs on a webserver, and comprises the Core System and a 
growing collection of optional Contributed Modules.
 
1.1 Appearance of your website (themes and styles)
A Backdrop website can assume a very wide variety of appearance. This appearance is set for 
you by the designer who determines the theme and styles used for your site. However, there 
will be some options available for you, the editor, to use, such as size and weight of text, page 
layout and use of images. If you want some changes discuss them with your designer. [You 
may of course be the designer yourself, or learn how to tackle some of these things.]
1.2 User permissions – who can do what
What you can and cannot do with your website is very rigorously controlled by Backdrop’s 
system of User Permissions. You may have only been granted permission to edit certain 
pages on the site, or you may have full editorial control over all the content; your System 
Administrator will have set these permissions, which are for the benefit of all since they 
restrict inadvertent change to something in the site. If there is something you need to change 
but cannot, ask your System Administrator whether you can be authorised to do so.
1.3 What makes a page (concept of nodes, layouts, blocks, navigation)
Visitors to your site will see it as a collection of pages, but actually each page that appears on 
the screen is made up of a number of elements put together by Backdrop to make up the page 
layout you see. Backdrop takes care of building the whole page including navigation menus, 
columns and footers, leaving you with the simpler task of making sure that each element has 
the right text and images.
The simplest Backdrop system will come with two types of Content, called Basic Page and 
Article. Other types of content will probably have been added by your Site Designer who has 
freedom to add all sorts of things, giving each type his own choice of name.
Your site also comes with a choice of page Layout, for use in different situations. For 
example your home page is likely to have one particular layout decided by your Site 
Designer. The layout determines what Blocks are used on the page and where they are 
placed. They control, for example, the use of columns on the page. Whether you can alter a 
layout or create a new one depends on your User Permissions.
In the next chapter we will explore some of these features.
1.4 Revisions and backups
One important thing that can be done is to keep a record of any changes that editors have 
made, with the option to revert to a previous version if any problem arises.
There are two mechanisms for doing this. The first is that when you edit a node, you tick a 
box to tell Backdrop to create a new revision of the node, storing a copy of the one you are 
replacing. The second mechanism is the optional Backup and Migrate module which will 
make a backup copy of all the content data settings for your website.
It is likely that your system administrator will have set this module to run periodically and 
keep a limited number of previous backups of your website. He would also arrange for 
backups of all the Backdrop software, including any optional Contributed Modules such as 
Backup and Migrate.
 
1.5 Roles of site designer and administrator
The Site Administrator is the person who ensures the Backdrop system  keeps running on the 
webserver and carries out any necessary updates of the software as new releases are made 
available by the maintenance and development teams. When a new release becomes 
available, the system administrator can very simply set your site to be in Maintenance 
Mode, arrange for a system backup and then upload the new release of software to the server. 
This is done within a matter of minutes and the site can then be returned to full operation.
The Site Administrator also controls the assignment of User Permissions, the approval of 
visitor comments (if required), and the addition of any new Contributed Modules if required 
to add functions to the system.
The Site Designer is the person who, starting from a basic Backdrop system, chooses and 
adds the design theme for the site, probably including initial content of text and images. Of 
course, the task can be much more than this, and include customised Javascript and Styles 
Sheets to give the site its unique appearance. Ready-made themes are available that make this 
role more straightforward.
It may well be that the three roles of Site Editor, Designer and Administrator are actually 
carried out by the same person, but for larger sites it is likely to be a team effort.

1.6 Getting Started – logging in
The system administrator will have told you the address (URL) of your site, your username 
and initial password. To control your site you just have to use your favourite browser to go to 
your home page, as in this example:
 
This home page has a three column layout with a user login block in the left column and a 
recent content block on the right. Both of these are optional: if your home page does not have 
a user login block then you must enter into your browser the URL www.yoursite.com/user, 
and the addition of /user will take you directly to a login page.
Once you have logged in with your personal username and password, some extra items will 
appear on the page, as below:
 
A narrow horizontal band has appeared across the top of the page, containing the 
administrative menu and the options available to you, limited by the user permissions that the 
site administrator has granted you. The sections below will explain more about these items: 
Content, Structure, Configuration.
?
2 Controlling content
In this section we walk through some of the basic operations, with the aid of screenshots 
taken from a simple working site. Because of the flexibility of Backdrop it is unlikely that 
your site will look like this, but the administrative menus and functions should be the same or 
very similar.
2.1 Editing text
Once you are logged in, the system will show ‘edit’ links for any item you are permitted to 
edit. But first you need to be able to find the item, and there are basically two ways of doing 
this. Method one is to navigate to the page you wish to edit, then select the edit key for the 
content you wish to edit. In the example below I have started from my home page and 
selected the ‘read more’ link at the foot of the summary displayed for my ‘Hello World’ 
article. This takes me from summary to whole article view, with new admin tabs ‘view’ and 
‘edit’ showing immediately below the article’s title, as shown here. Selecting ‘edit’ takes me 
to the edit page – see next page of this guide.
 
Method two is to select the page from the administrative list of content in the system. Do this 
by selecting content > find content from the admin menu across the top of your page, to reveal the 
Admin Content listing.
 
From this listing we can select operation ‘Edit’ from the drop-down at the right, and thereby 
open up the same edit window (shown on the next page).
?
There are many options for the appearance of the edit window in your Backdrop system, and 
yours may not look exactly like this, but the principles are the same. It provides WYSIWYG 
(what you see is what you get) editing, with a set of tool icons similar to those you get with a 
wordprocessor. Here is a screenshot of the upper part:
 
Within the edit window you can type any amendments or additional text and see 
approximately what it will look like on the final page. In addition to the normal word 
processing tool icons, there are two formatting ‘drop down’ menus shown here – ‘Format’ 
and ‘Styles’. These enable you to select different formats or styles for headings, paragraphs, 
phrases or words. These are explained in more detail later in this guide, as too is the addition 
of images.
The lower part of the page (an example is shown below) contains an optional set of selectors 
for essential control information. You are unlikely to see all those shown in this example 
because you will not have all the required ‘permissions’. For the moment just note in this 
example the publishing option tick-box enabling you to have the page ‘published’ or  ‘not 
published’. This is only possible for content that you originally created and are the owner, 
unless you have administrative status.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            

2.2 Adding images
Whilst using the edit window you can insert an image, either from those already stored for 
your website, or from your terminal (PC, Mac, tablet etc.). Your Backdrop system will have 
an in-built Image File Manager that enables you to select an image file stored in your 
terminal, upload it to file storage within your webserver, and insert it on your page, 
controlling size and positon as you do so.
The process involves a few simple steps as follows:
Step 1 : In your edit page put your cursor right at the start of the paragraph where you want 
your image to appear. Later you will choose whether to have the image on the left of the right 
of your paragraph. If you want your image to be in a separate paragraph, first create the new 
paragraph, then before adding the image to the empty paragraph, set the paragraph alignment 
to left, centre or right as required.
Step 2 : Use the edit tool icon for ‘Image’ to bring up an Image Properties menu like this:
 
Step 3 : Use ‘Browse Server’ to open a File Browser window and view the list of files already 
stored by Backdrop for your website. Here below you can see only two files listed, either 
select one of these and go to step 6, or go to step 4 to upload another file.
 
Step 4 : Select ‘upload’ from the upper left of the File Browser Window to open a file 
browsing menu:
 
Step 5 : Use ‘browse’ in the browsing menu to find the image file on your terminal’then 
select upload to get a screen like this in which your uploaded file is now on the server, and 
highlighted in the listing, with a preview shown in the lower part of the screen.
 
Step 6 : Select ‘Insert File’ from the choices along the upper part of the File Browser 
window. The image will now be added to your editing page, above the paragraph you aimed 
for. You now need to adjust its size and position.
Step 7 : The ‘Image Properties’ menu will now be on your screen (see below). In this menu 
you can enter a new size, using the width and/or height fields to enter a new value in pixels 
(note that this is intended for reducing the size, not for increasing it because that would cause 
blurring of the image). Use the ‘align’ field to choose whether you want the image to be at 
the left or right of your paragraph. Enter a value in the Hspace field, for example 20, to add 
that number of pixels of white space between the image and the text.
?
 
Step 9 : When you select ‘OK’ in the Image Properties menu you Editing page will look 
something like the screenshot below. If you are not happy with the size or placing of the 
image, you can ‘right click’ on it and select ‘Image Properties’ to bring back the menu and 
change a setting. Once you are satisfied that the image is correct, select ‘Save’ at the bottom 
of the editing page. You can, of course, always come back and re-edit the page later.
 

?
 
2.3 Uploading documents 
2.5 Links and anchors 
2.6 Content types 
2.7 Page layout 
2.8 The Home Page
3 Navigation 
3.1 Main menu 
3.2 Secondary menu 
3.3 User-friendly URLs 
3.4 Exclude from menu
4 Comments 
4.1 Allowing comments 
4.2 User registration 
4.3 Removing comments
5 Basic administration 
5.1 Admin menu 
5.2 Finding content 
5.3 File folders 
5.4 Reports 
5.5 Software updates
6 Opportunities 
6.1 Changing the appearance 
6.2 Adding functionality (contributed modules) 
6.3 Customised views 
6.4 Linking social media 
6.5 Other resources 
6.6 Getting help
Draft version 2 – 14th April 2015

